(publishing-ckan)=

# Publishing data to California Open Data aka CKAN

NOTE: Only non-spatial data should be directly published to CKAN. Spatial data
(i.e. data keyed by location in some manner) has to go through the Caltrans
geoportal and is subsequently synced to CKAN.

## What is the California Open Data Portal?

The state of California hosts its own instance of CKAN, called the [California Open Data Portal](https://data.ca.gov/).
[CKAN](https://ckan.org/) is an open-source data management tool; in other words,
it allows organizations such as Caltrans to host data so that users can search
for and download data sets that might be useful for analysis or research. Among
other agencies, Caltrans publishes [many data sets](https://data.ca.gov/organization/caltrans) to CKAN.
Data is generally published as flat files (typically CSV) alongside required
metadata and a data dictionary.

### Cal-ITP datasets

- [Cal-ITP GTFS-Ingest Pipeline Dataset (schedule data)](https://data.ca.gov/dataset/cal-itp-gtfs-ingest-pipeline-dataset)

## What is the publication script?

The publication script [publish.py](https://github.com/cal-itp/data-infra/blob/main/warehouse/scripts/publish.py), typically used within the [publish_open_data Airflow workflow](https://b2062ffca77d44a28b4e05f8f5bf4996-dot-us-west2.composer.googleusercontent.com/dags/publish_open_data/grid), relies on a [dbt exposure](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/exposures) to determine what to publish - in practice, that exposure is titled `california_open_data`. The tables included in that exposure, their CKAN destinations, and their published descriptions are defined in [\_gtfs_schedule_latest.yml](https://github.com/cal-itp/data-infra/blob/main/warehouse/models/mart/gtfs_schedule_latest/_gtfs_schedule_latest.yml) under the `exposures` heading.

By default, the columns of a table included in the exposure are _not_ published on the portal. This is to prevent fields that are useful for internal data management but are hard to interpret for public users, like `_is_current`, from being included in the open data portal. Columns meant for publication are explicitly included in publication via the dbt `meta` tag `publish.include: true`, which you can see on various columns of the models in the same YAML file where the exposure itself is defined.

The publication script does _not_ read from that YAML file directly when publishing - it reads from the manifest file generated by the `dbt_run_and_upload_artifacts` Airflow job. By default, that manifest file is read from the GCS bucket where `run_and_upload.py` stores it during regular daily runs. If you need to make changes to the Cal-ITP GTFS-Ingest Pipeline Dataset in between runs of the daily `dbt_run_and_upload_artifacts` Airflow job (e.g. if there's a time-sensitive bug you're fixing in open data), you'll need to either kick off an ad hoc run of that job in Airflow or run the script locally to generate a new manifest, and use that manifest to underpin the `publish.py` run. Take care when generating a manifest locally - you don't want any information in your local dbt project to be different than the production project besides the models you're making changes to.

## General open data publication process

### Develop data models

Generally, data models should be built in dbt/BigQuery if possible. For example,
we have [latest-only GTFS schedule models](https://github.com/cal-itp/data-infra/tree/main/warehouse/models/mart/gtfs_schedule_latest)
we can use to update and expand the existing [CKAN dataset](https://data.ca.gov/dataset/cal-itp-gtfs-ingest-pipeline-dataset)

### Document data

California Open Data requires two documentation files for published datasets.

1. `metadata.csv` - one row per resource (i.e. file) to be published
2. `dictionary.csv` - one row per column across all resources

We use dbt exposure-based data publishing to automatically generate
these two files using the main `publish.py` script (specifically the `document-exposure`
subcommand). The documentation from the dbt models' corresponding YAML will be
converted into appropriate CSVs and written out locally. By default, the script will read the latest `manifest.json` in GCS uploaded by the `dbt_run_and_upload_artifacts` Airflow job.

Run this command inside the `warehouse` folder, assuming you have local dbt
artifacts in `target/` from a `dbt run` or `dbt compile`.

```bash
poetry run python scripts/publish.py document-exposure california_open_data
```

Each day, a new version of `manifest.json` is automatically generated for tables in the production warehouse by the `dbt_run_and_upload_artifacts` job in [the `transform_warehouse` DAG](https://b2062ffca77d44a28b4e05f8f5bf4996-dot-us-west2.composer.googleusercontent.com/dags/transform_warehouse/grid), and placed inside the `calitp-dbt-artifacts` GCS bucket. If you intend to generate new documentation locally, you'll need to generate a new `manifest.json` locally first.

### Create dataset and metadata

Once you've generated the necessary metadata and dictionary CSV, you need to get
approval from the Caltrans Geospatial Data Officer (at the time of writing, Chad Baker) for publication. Send the dictionary and metadata CSVs via email, and explain what changes are coming to the dataset - have columns been added or removed from one of the tables, do you have a new table to add, or is there some other change?

For new tables, a CKAN destination will be created with UUIDs corresponding to each
model that will be published. If you are using dbt exposures, you will need to
update the `meta` field [here](https://github.com/cal-itp/data-infra/blob/main/warehouse/models/mart/gtfs_schedule_latest/_gtfs_schedule_latest.yml) to map the dbt models to the appropriate UUIDs.

For example:

```yaml
    meta:
      methodology: |
        Cal-ITP collects the GTFS feeds from a statewide list [link] every night and aggegrates it into a statewide table
        for analysis purposes only. Do not use for trip planner ingestation, rather is meant to be used for statewide
        analytics and other use cases. Note: These data may or may or may not have passed GTFS-Validation.
      coordinate_system_epsg: "4326"
      destinations:
        - type: ckan
          format: csv
          url: https://data.ca.gov
          resources:
            agency:
              id: e8f9d49e-2bb6-400b-b01f-28bc2e0e7df2
              description: |
                Each row is a cleaned row from an agency.txt file.
                Definitions for the original GTFS fields are available at:
                https://gtfs.org/reference/static#agencytxt.
            attributions:
              id: 038b7354-06e8-4082-a4a1-40debd3110d5
              description: |
                Each row is a cleaned row from an attributions.txt file.
                Definitions for the original GTFS fields are available at:
                https://gtfs.org/reference/static#attributionstxt.
```

### Publish the data

If you are using dbt-based publishing, the `publish_exposure` subcommand of `publish.py`
will query BigQuery, write out CSV files, and upload those files to CKAN.
[An Airflow job](https://b2062ffca77d44a28b4e05f8f5bf4996-dot-us-west2.composer.googleusercontent.com/dags/publish_open_data/grid) refreshes/updates the data at a specified
frequency, or the publication script can be run manually. By default, the `--no-publish` flag is set, executing a dry run. You can also write to GCS without uploading to CKAN by manually entering an arbitrary bucket destination.

The weekly publishing Airflow job supports referencing `gs://` paths for the manifest, which is used to determine which tables and columns to publish; by default, the script will read the latest manifest in GCS uploaded by the `dbt_run_and_upload_artifacts` Airflow job.
You may also choose to run dbt models and/or run the publish script locally; these
operations can be mixed-and-matched. If you are running `publish.py` locally, you
will need to set `$CALITP_CKAN_GTFS_SCHEDULE_KEY` ahead of time.

By default, the script will upload artifacts to GCS, but will not actually
upload data to CKAN. In addition, the script will upload the metadata and dictionary
files to GCS for eventual sharing with Caltrans employees responsible for the open data portal.

```bash
$ poetry run python scripts/publish.py publish-exposure california_open_data --manifest ./target/manifest.json
reading manifest from ./target/manifest.json
would be writing to gs://test-calitp-publish/california_open_data__metadata/dt=2022-08-30/ts=2022-08-30T20:46:00.474199Z/metadata.csv
would be writing to gs://test-calitp-publish/california_open_data__dictionary/dt=2022-08-30/ts=2022-08-30T20:46:00.474199Z/dictionary.csv
handling agency e8f9d49e-2bb6-400b-b01f-28bc2e0e7df2
...
writing 346 rows (42.9 kB) from andrew_gtfs_schedule.agency to gs://test-calitp-publish/california_open_data__agency/dt=2022-08-30/ts=2022-08-30T20:46:00.474199Z/agency.csv
would be uploading to https://data.ca.gov e8f9d49e-2bb6-400b-b01f-28bc2e0e7df2 if --publish
...
```

You can add the `--publish` flag to actually upload artifacts to CKAN after they
are written to GCS. You must be using a production bucket to publish, either
by setting `$CALITP_BUCKET__PUBLISH` or using the `--bucket` flag. In addition,
you may specify a manifest file in GCS if desired.

```bash
poetry run python scripts/publish.py publish-exposure california_open_data --bucket gs://calitp-publish --manifest gs://calitp-dbt-artifacts/latest/manifest.json --publish
```
